(upbeat music)
Another common thing that we do in JavaScript
is adding and removing of classes
and it's a little bit different than just using properties
like we've used so far
so let's dive into how this all works.
So I'm actually just gonna comment out,
(mouse clicking)
let's comment out everything.
Let's start fresh.
So we'll go down and we'll say classes.
So when you select an element, there is a classList
attribute on that and on that, there are some methods
for getting all of the classes
as well as removing and adding and removing
multiple classes.
So let's go and find, let's do something fun.
Maybe we'll do some animation.
So let's grab this image here and...
Let's create just like a brand new image
so copy one of these images, go up here
if it's not already there and give yourself
a nice big 600 pixel image.
(whistles)
Nice rocks.
Let's go ahead and give that a class of nice.
And we'll go ahead and select it
so const pic is equal to document.querySelector,
we'll grab the image with a class of nice
and we'll console.log the pic.classList.
Now, if we open up our dev tools here,
you'll see that we get this thing which is a DOMTokenList
and it will give, it's kind of like an array of all
of the classes that are on that image.
Now, if we go ahead and add another nice and cool,
you'll see that we get both of them.
And it will also give us a value
of all of the classes on there.
So that's pretty cool because we can be able to add them.
However, if you look in the prototype, we're gonna,
we haven't learned what the prototype is just yet
but if you sneak into the prototype,
you're often able to see what are the methods
that you're able to call against the thing that we have.
So classList has a prototype
and in that there's all kinds of adds, contains,
entries, forEach, items, keys.
A lot of these are methods for working with the classes
so that's exactly what we're gonna do here.
So what we can do is take that pic.classList
and we can run .add, you see actually even my VS Code
is giving me like commonly used ones,
like these little stars.
These are ones that I use a lot in my own coding.
Add, remove, contains, and toggle
so add if I wanna add a class of dog.
Or maybe we'll say open
and then when I run the code and inspect that
and see that it's there, maybe you can also remove
a class of cool.
And now when we run it, you see it's gone.
There is toggle, which is pretty cool.
So let's actually write a little bit of CSS
so we can visually see what's going on here.
So let's go just to here
and we've got style tag.
If not, just give yourself a style tag somewhere on the page
and let's just give ourselves the class of round
and we'll say border-radius: 50%.
Then what we'll do is we will add a class of round.
So pic.classList.add('round')
Now, when we refresh, it's obviously got a class of round.
The kinda cool thing about that is that we can add
and remove that class either by placing it into the console
or we can do it on click.
Let's show you both.
So let's say classList.toggle,
that will add it if it's not there
and remove it if it is there.
So look at that.
Beautiful.
And we can just copy that and paste it into our console
to just see that it adds and removes it.
If we go into our CSS and we add a transition: all 0.2s.
What that will do is every time we run it, it should
woo!
Oh, you know what, it's only animating itself
when it has the class.
So maybe we will grab our image
and add the transition on the image, not the class of round.
Now when you sort of toggle that,
you'll see that it's pretty cool where it like
adds and removes it.
The kinda cool thing about that is we're gonna learn about
events really quickly.
We can peak ahead real quick.
We can say that pic.addEventListener
and then we're going to listen for a click.
And when that happens,
we can run a function.
Actually, maybe we'll make a function down here
called toggleRound
and all that will do is it will toggle class of round
and then here we can pass a reference to that function.
Again, we haven't learned this yet but stay with me.
I think we can understand what's going on here.
We make a function called toggleRound
that will toggle the classList here
and then we will just, every time we click it,
we'll run that function.
So (imitates object sliding up and down)
you have to make the sounds yourself.
And it's pretty cool because now we can
just go on this round and say things
like transform: rotate(20deg).
Woo!
And then you can go bananas with it.
Here, maybe two, let's do 360.
Oh, you can actually, no, you can use turn.
1turn.
Oh!
And we can scale it, 2.
And maybe add a box-shadow:
0 0 10px black.
You get the point, right?
It's pretty cool that a lot of JavaScript interaction
is simply just going to be adding and removing classes
at different points in time.
And that will allow us to then step in with CSS
and add and remove all these different transitions
that we have.
So that's pretty common with things like modals or navs
that need to open and close or slide in from the side
and we'll be doing quite a bit of that in this class.
But just know that we've got this classList here
and we've got add, remove, toggle,
and then also has contains which I don't use all that often
but we could.
So we just say the pic.classList.contains
is it currently open?
True.
Click it.
Oh no, is it round?
That's what we're looking for, round.
True.
Click it again.
And it should return false to us.
So that will be helpful in situations
if you need to know if something is currently open
or if there's a specific state that you're saving
in the classList.
So that is adding and removing classes.
In the next video, we're going to go
into just regular attributes.
So even though classes is an attribute.
So we can say pic.className,
that will actually just give us
a list of the class.
That's just a property on the element called className.
However, classList gives us some sort of utility functions
or utility methods for working with it.
So any time that you wanna work with classes,
I always reach for classList.
It's somewhat new, a couple years old in the browser.
That's just why that one is existing there.
So with that, I will see you in the next one.